Foundations for Using Bayesian Statistics in Ecology
Instructors:
Dr. Beth Ross, 207 Leasure Hall, Kansas Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, beross@ksu.edu
Dr. David Haukos, 204 Leasure Hall, Kansas Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, dhaukos@ksu.edu
Lectures: 12:30-1:20 Tuesday and Thursday (subject to change)
Lab: 12:30-3:20 Wednesday (subject to change)
Description
The material in this course will cover the application of Bayesian statistics (with comparisons to frequentist and traditional statistical approaches when appropriate) to ecological data, and is intended for graduate students in the biological and natural resource sciences.  An understanding of linear regression and basic principles of biometry is required, and experience with R is encouraged.  This will be a 2 credit course that meets for the first 8 weeks of the semester. Class size will be limited to 12 due to computer lab space.  
Learning objectives: The goal of this course is to provide students with a background and understanding in ecological statistics from a Bayesian perspective.  After completing the course, students will be able to 1) translate ecological questions into a statistical framework, 2) specify prior, joint, and conditional distributions for hierarchical models, 3) implement hierarchical Bayesian models and test goodness-of-fit, and 4) analyze spatiotemporal data in a Bayesian framework.  To achieve these goals, students are expected to regularly attend and participate in class discussions and lab work.  Readings for each class should be completed prior to attending, along with a thorough read-through of lecture or lab material for the day.  A brief overview of the material will be given at the beginning of each class period, and a large portion of the class time will be spent discussing the readings and addressing questions related to the topic of lecture.
Course Format:
Lectures will focus on key concepts of Bayesian statistics (and comparison to frequentist and maximum likelihood methods when appropriate) and will run concurrently with an applied lab focusing on learning Bayesian statistics with ecological examples.  Readings for each lecture and lab, along with any other outside content relevant to the day’s material, will be posted on K-State Online prior to class.
Course Resources:
Lecture notes, readings for each class, lab exercises and data will all be posted on K-State Online prior to class.  


Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who need classroom accommodations, access to technology, or information about emergency building/campus evacuation processes should contact the Student Access Center and/or their instructor.  Services are available to students with a wide range of disabilities including, but not limited to, physical disabilities, medical conditions, learning disabilities, attention deficit disorder, depression, and anxiety.  If you are a student enrolled in campus/online courses through the Manhattan or Olathe campuses, contact the Student Access Center at accesscenter@k-state.edu, 785-532-6441; for Salina campus, contact the Academic and Career Advising Center at acac@k-state.edu, 785-826-2649.
Course Schedule:
DateTopicReading AssignmentWeek 1Introduction to Bayesian stats and probabilityRoyle and Dorazio, Ch. 1
R review and data manipulationOnline tutorial (complete tutorial prior to class), Wilson et al. 2013Rubric for lab assignments handed outStatistical InferenceRoyle and Dorazio, Ch. 2, Kery and Schaub, Ch. 2Week 2Probability Distributions and likelihoods (Discrete)Ver Hoef and Boveng 2007Working with probability distributions in RLab 1 assignment dueProbability Distributions and likelihoods (Continuous) TBDWeek 3Choosing priorsMcCarthy and Masters 2005, Choy et al. 2009, Kuhnert et al. 2010Rubric for group project handed outImpact of prior on posterior distributionsLab 2 assignment dueGLMs, random and fixed effectsKery and Shaub, Ch. 3, O’Hara and Kotze 2010, Bolker et al. 2009Week 4Hierarchical modelsCressie et al., 2009 and responses, Wikle 2003Course surveyBayesian Linear RegressionKery and Schaub, Chs. 3 & 4Lab 3 assignment dueGoodness-of-fitGelman and Shalizi 2013Week 5Model SelectionHooten 2014, Burnham & Anderson 2002, pgs. 49-64 and80-84Goodness-of-fit, various methods of model selectionTBDLab 4 assignment dueState-space ModelsDennis et al. 2006, Clark and Bjornstad 2004, Knape and de Valpine 2012Week 6State-space modelsPatterson et al. 2008, Royle and Kery 2007Data for group project handed outState-space modelsKery and Schaub, Ch. 5Lab 5 assignment duePopulation dynamics models:  Occupancy and closed capture-recapture,Royle and Dorazio Chs. 3 & 5Week 7Population dynamics models: Capture-recapture and community dynamics modelsRoyle and Dorazio, Chs. 5 & 12Population dynamics modelsOccupancy, capture-recapture, and/or community dynamics (TBD)Lab 6 assignment dueIntegrated modelsBesbee 2004, Peron and Koons 2013Week 8Review and catch-upFinal project presentationsLab 7 assignment dueDiscussion of final projectFinal project write-up due
Grading System:
Lecture participation (25% of final grade): Students are expected to regularly participate in class discussions.  Additionally, students will select two readings (one from the first four weeks and one from the second) to present during class, and should prepare a 3-5 minute introduction of the reading to stimulate group discussion.
Lab assignments (55% of final grade): Students will receive a short assignment to complete for each lab period.  Lab assignments are due (emailed to instructor) by the beginning of the next lab period.  This course will move quickly, so your learning will benefit from completing each assignment prior to beginning the next.
Final project (20% of final grade): Students will work in groups to complete a final project.  Each group will be presented with the same dataset and asked to provide a thorough analysis, write-up, and presentation of their findings.  The goal of the project is to illustrate the underlying fundamentals of Bayesian statistics and the techniques presented during the course.
Academic Honesty
Kansas State University has an Honor System based on personal integrity, which is presumed to be sufficient assurance that, in academic matters, one's work is performed honestly and without unauthorized assistance. Undergraduate and graduate students, by registration, acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Honor System. The policies and procedures of the Honor System apply to all full and part-time students enrolled in undergraduate and graduate courses on-campus, off-campus, and via distance learning. The honor system website can be reached via the following URL: www.k-state.edu/honor. A component vital to the Honor System is the inclusion of the Honor Pledge which applies to all assignments, examinations, or other course work undertaken by students. The Honor Pledge is implied, whether or not it is stated: "On my honor, as a student, I have neither given nor received unauthorized aid on this academic work." A grade of XF can result from a breach of academic honesty. The F indicates failure in the course; the X indicates the reason is an Honor Pledge violation.
